

1, the ‘sand’ and ‘road’ pixels are hard to be distinguished
even for humans with limited context. in contrast, their differentiation becomes conspicuous when they are considered
in the global scene. thus, how to equip local features with
a broader view of contextual awareness is a pivotal issue in
image labeling.
in this paper, recurrent neural networks (rnns) [9][16]
are introduced to address this issue by modeling the contextual dependencies of local features. specifically, we adopt
undirected cyclic graphs (ucg) to model the interactions
among image units. due to the loopy property of ucgs,
rnns are not directly applicable to ucg-structured images. thus, we decompose the ucg to several directed
acyclic graphs (dags, and four dags are used in our experiments). in other words, an ucg-structured image is approximated by the combination of several dag-structured
images. then, we develop the dag-rnns, a generalization
of rnns [8][9], to process dag-structured images. each
hidden layer is generated independently through applying
dag-rnns to the corresponding dag-structured image,
and they are integrated to produce the context-aware feature maps. in this case, the local representations are able to
embed the abstract gist of the image, so their discriminative
power are enhanced remarkably.
we integrate the dag-rnns with the convolution and
deconvolution layers, thus giving rise to an end-to-end trainable full labeling network. functionally, the convolution
layer transforms rgb raw pixels to compact and discriminative representations. based on them, the proposed dag-

in image labeling, local representations for image
units are usually generated from their surrounding image
patches, thus long-range contextual information is not effectively encoded. in this paper, we introduce recurrent
neural networks (rnns) to address this issue. specifically,
directed acyclic graph rnns (dag-rnns) are proposed to
process dag-structured images, which enables the network
to model long-range semantic dependencies among image
units. our dag-rnns are capable of tremendously enhancing the discriminative power of local representations, which
significantly benefits the local classification. meanwhile,
we propose a novel class weighting function that attends to
rare classes, which phenomenally boosts the recognition accuracy for non-frequent classes. integrating with convolution and deconvolution layers, our dag-rnns achieve new
state-of-the-art results on the challenging siftflow, camvid
and barcelona benchmarks.

1. 