
we integrate the recently proposed spatial transformer network (spn) (jaderberg & simonyan,
2015) into a recurrent neural network (rnn) to
form an rnn-spn model. we use the rnnspn to classify digits in cluttered mnist sequences. the proposed model achieves a single
digit error of 1.5% compared to 2.9% for a convolutional networks and 2.0% for convolutional
networks with spn layers. the spn outputs a
zoomed, rotated and skewed version of the input
image. we investigate different down-sampling
factors (ratio of pixel in input and output) for
the spn and show that the rnn-spn model is
able to down-sample the input images without deteriorating performance. the down-sampling in
rnn-spn can be thought of as adaptive downsampling that minimizes the information loss in
the regions of interest. we attribute the superior
performance of the rnn-spn to the fact that it
can attend to a sequence of regions of interest.

convolutional network is used to predict a sequence of digits. because the predictions are made with n independent
softmax layers at the top of the network, the spn layers
must find the box containing the entire sequence. a better
model would sequentially produce the targets by locating
and zoom in on each individual element before each prediction. in this paper we combine the spn network with a
recurrent neural network (rnn) to create a recurrent spn
(rnn-spn) that sequentially zooms in on each element.
this is illustrated in figure 1 panel b). in the spn-rnn
a rnn network produces inputs for the spn at each timestep. using these inputs the spn produces a transformed
version of the input image which is then used for classification. by running the recursion for multiple steps and
conditioning each transformation on the previous time-step
the rnn-spn model can sequentially attend to the part of
the image containing each elements of interest and only use
the relevant information for classification. because these
regions are generally small we experiment with forcing the
rnn-spn to down-sample the image which can thought of
as adaptive down-sampling thus keeps the resolution of the
regions of interest (nearly) constant.

1. 