

attempts that explicitly consider the static user-side contexts(e.g.,
age, gender, location), which are readily available in commercial
systems. in terms of session modeling, explicit modeling of static
user contexts is important because user navigation paths of items
during sessions are dependent on static contexts, due to the fact
that users with different static contexts have different preferences
with respect to the same items. for example, when recommended a
job position in paris during a session, a user living in new york will
tend to look for alternative positions in new york in the following
searches, while a user living in paris will tend to look for the similar
positions.
therefore, in order to seamlessly integrate static user-side contexts into rnn session models, we propose an augmented rnn
(arnn), which is an augmented version of rnn that can improve
on any existing rnn session model. the unique feature of arnn is
that it estimates user-contextual preference by modeling high-order
interaction between static user context and the previous item using a product-based neural network (pnn)[11], which is a neural
network (nn) variant of the factorization machine (fm)[13]. by
integrating this contextual preference with the hidden states of
an rnn session model, the arnn makes more personalized recommendations than the plain rnn session models that does not
consider user contexts.
we evaluated the arnn on two datasets: a job recommendation
dataset and a standard e-commerce dataset. through an experiment,
we verified that the arnn successfully captured user-contextual
preference when abundant user contexts were available, which
led to a substantial improvement in the recommendation quality
against an rnn baseline.

the recent adoption of recurrent neural networks (rnns) for session modeling has yielded substantial performance gains compared
to previous approaches. in terms of context-aware session modeling,
however, the existing rnn-based models are limited in that they
are not designed to explicitly model rich static user-side contexts
(e.g., age, gender, location). therefore, in this paper, we explore
the utility of explicit user-side context modeling for rnn session
models. specifically, we propose an augmented rnn (arnn) model
that extracts high-order user-contextual preference using the productbased neural network (pnn) in order to augment any existing rnn
session model. evaluation results show that our proposed model
outperforms the baseline rnn session model by a large margin
when rich user-side contexts are available.



