arXiv:1805.12098v1 [cs.CV] 30 May 2018

Context-aware Cascade Attention-based RNN for
Video Emotion Recognition
Man-Chin Sun

Shih-Huan Hsu

Min-Chun Yang

Jen-Hsien Chien

Emotibot Inc.
Taipei, Taiwan
manchinsun@emotibot.com

Emotibot Inc.
Taipei, Taiwan
cyrilhsu@emotibot.com

Emotibot Inc.
Taipei, Taiwan
kaiyang@emotibot.com

Emotibot Inc.
Taipei, Taiwan
kennychien@emotibot.com

Abstract—Emotion recognition can provide crucial information
about the user in many applications when building humancomputer interaction (HCI) systems. Most of current researches
on visual emotion recognition are focusing on exploring facial
features. However, context information including surrounding
environment and human body can also provide extra clues to
recognize emotion more accurately. Inspired by “sequence to
sequence model” for neural machine translation, which models
input and output sequences by an encoder and a decoder in
recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture respectively, a novel
architecture, “CACA-RNN”, is proposed in this work. The proposed network consists of two RNNs in a cascaded architecture
to process both context and facial information to perform video
emotion classification. Results of the model were submitted to
video emotion recognition sub-challenge in Multimodal Emotion
Recognition Challenge (MEC2017). CACA-RNN outperforms the
MEC2017 baseline (mAP of 21.7%): it achieved mAP of 45.51%
on the testing set in the video only challenge.
Index Terms—emotion recognition, video classification, action
recognition, spatiotemporal model, human-computer interaction,
HCI

I. INTRODUCTION
Understanding human emotion has attracted a lot of attention recently. And it also plays an important role in many
applications such as human-computer interaction, advertising,
social media communication and cognitive science. However,
emotion recognition is still a challenging task. It’s very
difficult to find an effective model for emotion and facial
expressions, let alone combining of multimodal data of visual,
vocal and even text to emotion recognition. In this work,
a novel model is proposed to consider facial and context
information concurrently, which leads to superior performance
in emotion recognition.
One of the key problems of emotion recognition is emotion
representation or emotion model. There are many researches
about emotion representation, such as six discrete basic emotion classes proposed by Ekman [1], continuous dimensional
models (e.g. valence and arousal in [2]), and facial action
coding system (FACS) in [3], which describes facial movement
in action units (AU). Combination of facial action units can
be classified into different emotions.

Many emotion datasets and challenges have also been published using aforementioned emotion representation models
such as AFF-Wild [4], which uses valence and arousal space
to model facial expression. For the emotion classification
representation, challenges such as Emotion Recognition Challenge in the Wild (EmotiW) [5] and Multimodal Emotion
Recognition Challenge (MEC) [6], which is the challenge
of this work attending, have been held for recent years.
Furthermore, some challenges such as [5], [6] also includes
vocal features for emotion recognition.
In psychological researches [7], [8], it has been discussed
that other than facial expressions, contextual information
such as body, pose and surrounding environment can also
provide important clues for emotion perception. Evidence
and experiments are also provided in [7], [8] to show that
emotion perception can be influenced by context. Moreover,
in some cases, context is even indispensable for emotion
communication. Similar results are also proposed in computer
vision literatures. Experiments in [9] show that when using
both context and body information, performance of emotion
recognition outperforms that of using only body image or
only context image. A dataset “Emotions in Context Database”
(EMOTIC) has also been published recently in [9].
Most of recent emotion recognition methods focus on
exploring facial features based on deep neural network. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has been used to extract
face features in some works [10], [11]. Some researches
incorporate 3D Convolutional Networks (C3D) and Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) to model spatial and temporal clues
of faces [12], [13]. Also some works [12]–[14] combine audio
models to perform multimodal emotion recognition.
This work focuses on video emotion classification using
sequence of both facial and context information. A ContextAware Cascade Attention-based RNN is proposed here to
leverage both facial and context features to perform video
emotion recognition. To further evaluate the influence of context information, multiple RNN-based networks are designed
to compare different methods of fusing face and context
features.

II. R ELATED W ORKS
Many works proposed video recognition methods based on
neural networks. C3D networks were utilized to learn temporal
information from sequential images for action recognition
[15], [16] and video emotion recognition [13]. Recurrent neural network, which has temporal recurrence of latent variables,
was proposed in [17]. Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) was
proposed in [18] to handle long-range sequence learning.
“Sequence-to-sequence” model [19], which models sequence encoding and generation using LSTM RNNs, is one
of the popular architectures of learning from sequential data.
It has achieved the state-of-the-art results in neural machine
translation. The sequence-to-sequence model consists of a
RNN-based encoder and a decoder to learn temporal structures
and generate output sequence. Furthermore, temporal attention
mechanism has also been proposed in [20] as a soft-alignment
method in machine translation to learn relevant temporal
segments from encoder and decoder.
The encoder-decoder framework in sequence-to-sequence
has also been used to describe videos with CNN and RNN
to generate captions [25]. The temporal attention mechanism
has also been incorporated in [26] to learn relevant temporal
intervals from video sequences.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
In this section, the effect of context on improving emotion
perception is first shown in Section. III-A. Then, inspired
by Sequence-to-sequence model and attention mechanism for
neural machine translation, a novel architecture for sequence
classification will be proposed. Sequence-to-sequence model
and attention mechanism will be briefly described in Section.
III-B and III-C respectively. Then the proposed model will be
introduced in detail in Section. III-D.

B. Sequence-to-Sequence Framework
Sequence-to-sequence, which is an encoder-decoder framework, was proposed in [19] to perform machine translation.
The encoder reads a sequence of input vectors over input time
1 . . . T as X = (x1 , . . . , xT ), into a “context vector” at encoder ce,T . The context vector here represents the stored state
and information of the encoder. When the encoder is a RNN,
the hidden states are represented as he,t = f (xe,t , he,t−1 )
and ce,T = g(he,1 , he,2 , . . . , he,T ), where f (·) and g(·) are
nonlinear functions.
The decoder then generates one prediction at output time i,
yi , from context vector ce,T and all the previous predicted output. With a RNN decoder, its conditional probability models
as
p(yi | y1 , . . . , yi−1 , ce,T ) = h(yi−1 , ce,T , hd,i ),

(1)

where hd,i is the hidden states of the decoder RNN at
output time i, hd,i = f (hd,i−1 , yi−1 , ce,T ), and f (·), h(·)
are nonlinear functions.

1

variance of labeled intensity

without context information. The dataset consists of 55504
images with bonding box of each face. Each image is labeled
by intensity of 9 emotions: “angry”, “disgust”, “happy”, “sad”,
“surprise”, “fear”, “neutral”, “contempt”, “confused” and intensity is in score from 0 to 5 by each labeler. Each image is
labeled by at least 5 labelers. Then the disagreement of each
emotion is calculated by averaging the variance of labeled
intensity of each image.
In Fig. 1, it is shown that when providing the labelers with
original images of both face and context, more consensus
can be observed in the obtained labels. Furthermore, emotion
class “happy” and “neutral” have the least disagreement, which
means happy and neutral can be recognized easily, while other
emotions of higher disagreement shows more confusion in
labelers.

original image
cropped face
0.8

C. Attention Mechanism

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

an

gr

y

dis

gu

st

ha

pp
y

sa

d

su

rp

ris

e

fea

r

ne

ut

co

ra

l

nt

co

em

pt

nfu

se

ov
d

er

all

Fig. 1: Visualization of human emotion perception.
The dataset described in Section. III-A is labeled twice:
original images are the label obtained providing the labelers
with original images; cropped face are the labels when only
lablers are provided with cropped face.
A. Effect of Context Information on Emotion Perception
To visualize the effect of context information to emotion
perception for human, an experiment was designed to show
disagreement of human label of the same dataset with and

Attention mechanism has been proposed to improve the
performance of English-to-French machine translation in [20]
as a sequence-to-sequence model. The mechanism makes
decoder not only depend the context vector from encoder but
allow the decoder model to learn relevant parts over source
sequence to predict target.
The soft dot global attention in [22] is adapted here. An
alignment vector ai = (ai,1 , . . . , ai,T ) is a sequence over input
time, where ai,t is derived by encoder’s hidden states he,t at
input time t and current decoder’s hidden state hd,i at output
time i, which is
exp(score(hd,i , he,t ))
.
ai,t = PT
t=1 exp(score(hd,i , he,t ))

(2)

The score function implemented here is dot operation from
hd,i and he,t , where score(hd,i , he,t ) = hTd,i he,t and noted
that the hidden size of encoder and decoder should be equal.

attention

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

CNN

CNN

CNN

CNN

CNN

CNN

CNN

CNN

t=1

t=2

t=3

t=4

t=1

t=2

t=3

t=4

face stream

context stream

Fig. 2: Context-Aware Cascade Attention-based RNN (CACA-RNN). A video clip is preprocessed into a face stream (sequence
of cropped faces) and a context stream (sequence of original frames). Then, the extracted features of the two sequences are
fed into two LSTMs: the context RNN learns contextual temporal information and the face RNN learns facial information.
The two LSTMs are in a cascaded architecture with attention mechanism. The context RNN stores context clue in LSTM cells
and initiates the first state of face RNN at the first time step. The face RNN then learns from face features and processed
context information from attention mechanism. Then the output of face RNN of the last frame of clip is considered to be the
prediction of the clip.

Then the context vector ci at output time i is derived as
weighted sum of all source he and ai,t , which is computed as
ci =

Tx
X

ai,t · he,t .

(3)

t=1

To summarize (2) and (3), the context vector with attention
mechanism is a function of hidden states of both encoder and
decoder. Based on both decoder and encoder’s hidden states,
the decoder can pay attention to relevant input sequence of
encoder and generate aligned output sequence.
D. Context-Aware Cascade Attention-based RNN
Context-Aware Cascade Attention-based RNN (CACARNN) is proposed to leverage both face and context features to
perform emotion recognition. The CACA-RNN consists of two
LSTMs in a hierarchical cascade architecture with attention
mechanism (Fig. 2).
Unlike encoder-decoder framework, which the decoder is a
generative model, there are two encoder-like RNNs in CACARNN, “context RNN” and “face RNN”, which they read face
feature and context feature respectively. The two RNNs are
cascaded with attention mechanism in between. The attention
mechanism of the CACA-RNN can locate relevant context
information from the context RNN when processing the face
sequence in the face RNN. After the context RNN reads whole
context features, the face RNN encodes face features and
its LSTM context vector is derived from attention operation
of face and context RNN’s hidden states. Then the face
RNN outputs the final prediction class after forwarding whole
sequence.

The context RNN reads the context feature sequence from
time step 1 to T as Xcontext = (xcontext1 , . . . , xcontextT ) into
a LSTM context vector ccontextT , where its hidden states at
time t being denoted as hcontextt = f (xcontextt , hcontextt−1 ).
Similarily, the face RNN reads face feature sequences Xface =
(xface1 , . . . , xfaceT ) and its conditional probability is modeled
as
p(yi | xface1 , . . . , xfacei , cfacei )
= h(xfacei , cfacei , hfacei ),

(4)

where hfacei is the hidden state of the face RNN, denoted
as hfacei = f (hfacei−1 , xfacei , cfacei ). And the LSTM context
vector cfacei is derived from Eq. (2) and Eq. (3), which is

cfacei =

T
X
t=1

exp(score(hfacei , hcontextt ))
· hcontextt . (5)
PT
t=1 exp(score(hfacei , hcontextt ))

IV. C OMPARISON ARCHITECTURES
To investigate performance of RNN-based models fusing
face and context features on emotion recognition, various
architectures of combining both features or using only one
of the features are introduced as the following:
Context-RNN performs emotion classification using video
frames as input, depicted in Fig. 3a. The model is similar to a
model in [23] for action recognition, where a LSTM processes
sequential features from CNN and learns to predict human
action. The Context-RNN reads context features which are
extracted from a CNN feature extractor, and last prediction is
taken as output.

V. E XPERIMENTS AND E VALUATION

LSTM

CNN

LSTM

CNN

LSTM

CNN

CNN

CNN

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

CNN

CNN

CNN

A. Datasets

FC

CNN

(a) Face-RNN and ContextRNN

(b) Parallel-RNN
attention

LSTM

CNN

CNN

LSTM

CNN

CNN

LSTM

CNN

CNN

(c) Concatenated-RNN

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

CNN

CNN

CNN

CNN

CNN

CNN

(d) CACA-RNN

Fig. 3: Comparison of RNN-based emotion recognition architectures using face and/or context streams as input. Both
streams are processed by a CNN feature extractor into corresponding feature stream as LSTM’s input. (a) A single LSTM
performs emotion prediction from a feature stream. (b) Two
LSTMs reading two streams individually. Hidden states of the
two LSTMs are fused together by fully-connected network
for final prediction. (c) Two feature streams are concatenated
together as input of single LSTM. (d) A cascaded RNN
architecture of two LSTMs processing two feature streams:
the left LSTM reads one feature stream and store a context
vector in its hidden states. And the right LSTM reads the
other feature stream with its hidden states is initiated by the
left LSTM’s context vector. The right LSTM’s hidden states
are generated from its input and attention from the left LSTM.

Chinese Natural Audio-Visual Emotion Database
(CHEAVD) 2.0 is used by Multimodal Emotion Recognition
Challenge (MEC) 2017 challenge. CHEAVD 2.0 includes
4917 training clips, 707 validation clips and 1406 testing
clips from Chinese movies and TV programs. Each clip is
labeled with one emotion category according to both video
and audio content in 8 classes: “happy”, “sad”, “angry”,
“surprise”, “disgust”, “worried”, “anxious”, and “neutral”.
To enlarge the training set, the submitted model was trained
with additional private dataset. The dataset includes 4562
video clips (“happy”: 409, “sad”: 951, “angry”: 212, “surprise”: 357, “disgust”: 270, “worried”: 58, “anxious”: 88 , and
“neutral”: 359) and training data clips are trimmed from the
videos.
B. Feature Extraction
For each video clip, two streams are generated in preprocessing stage: “face stream” and “context stream”. Face
stream contains sequence of each detected faces from each
frame, cropped and scaled to 128 × 128. With each detected
face, corresponding context stream contains the original frame,
center-cropped and scaled to 224 × 224.
Then, two pre-trained CNNs are used to extract features
from the face and context streams as the input of CACARNN’s face RNN and context RNN. The face feature extractor
is a classifier trained with a private dataset for image emotion
classification without last layer. And the context feature extractor is a pre-trained model from Squeezenet [27] with ImageNet
classification [28], which the output of the last convolution
layer is used as context feature.
C. Training Details

Face-RNN, on the contrary to the Context-RNN, is only using face feature sequence to predict emotion. The architecture
is depicted in Fig. 3a.
Parallel-RNN, illustrated in Fig. 3b, consists of two RNNs
processing face and context features individually. Then the
hidden states of the two RNNs are fused for final prediction
at latest time step.
Concatenated-RNN contains a RNN taking concatenated
face and context features as input. Then its output at the last
time step is taken to be the prediction of the video clip. (Fig.
3c)
CACA-RNN A, Context-Aware Cascade Attention-based
RNN, consists of two RNN in a cascade architecture with
attention mechanism (Fig. 2). The left RNN reads context
stream into a context vector. And the right RNN takes
attention-processed context vector and face stream as input,
then predicts output at the latest time.
CACA-RNN B has the same structure as CACA-RNN A
(Fig. 2) except for its left RNN reads face stream and the right
RNN reads context stream.

Videos are downsampled to 5 fps in both training and
inference phases. In training phase, each video is sampled from
a random initial frame for data augmentation. In evaluation
phase, the initial frame is fixed to be the first frame of video
clip.
For the submitted result, Adam [29] was used with learning
rate 10−4 with mini-batch size 32. The weights of feature
extractor CNNs are fixed while training. There is a pooling
layer after the context CNN to down sample feature size to size
25088 as the input of context RNN. Also, a fully connected
layer is added after the face CNN to encode face features with
vector of size 128. Additionally, the face RNN is a two-layer
LSTM with 128 hidden states. The context RNN is also a
LSTM with 128 hidden states and attention mechanism is on
face RNN.
D. Quantitative results
To explore performance of the architectures described in
Section. IV, the validation results are summarized in Table. I,
with only CHEAVD 2.0 was used for training and validation
in the experiments.

Model
Face-RNN
Context-RNN
Parallel-RNN
Concatenated-RNN
CACA-RNN A
CACA-RNN B

#params
1.58M
1.19M
0.86M
1.38M
0.79M
0.79M

mAP (%)
38.87
28.74
40.44
39.78
40.73
39.91

ACC (%)
52.72
37.68
54.30
54.15
53.01
54.44

3D
CNN

TABLE I: Experimental results on MEC2017 validation set.

To make comparison fair, the models are adjusted such
that number of parameters are close. For each experiment,
training was repeated five times with different random seeds
and median performance metrics are selected among them. The
feature sizes of face feature and context feature are encoded to
128 by fully-connected layers. Face-RNN, Context-RNN and
Concatenated-RNN has a two-layer LSTM with 256 hidden
nodes. In Parallel-RNN, there are two two-layer LSTMs of
128 hidden nodes. And the first LSTM of CACA-RNN also
has two layers with 128 hidden states, the second RNN is a
LSTM with 128 hidden nodes.
Notably, the models fusing both context and face clues
outperform the models using only one of the features. It
shows that the context information is helpful but not enough
to perform emotion recognition without cropped face.
For models fusing face and context features, the results show
that Parallel-RNN outperforms Concatenated-RNN. Learning
from multiple different feature sequences can be more effective
for networks with multiple branches than a single branch
model. The performance of CACA-RNN A and CACA-RNN
B is higher than the others in evaluation in mAP (mean average
precision) and accuracy. It shows that cascade attention-based
RNN can improve the performance of handling two kinds of
features.
VI. R ESULTS ON MEC 2017
Five submissions are allowed to submit to video-based
emotion recognition sub-challenge in MEC2017. Evaluation
on mean average precision (mAP) and accuracy are both
considered in MEC, two (of five) evaluation results of submissions are shown in Table. II: (1) “CACA-RNN”, described
in previous sections, the one with highest mAP, (2) “CACARNN+2D-3D-CNN”, the one with highest best accuracy. Their
confusion matrices are shown in Fig. 5.
CACA-RNN+2D-3D-CNN is an ensemble network of
CACA-RNN and a 2D-3D-CNN network using linear
weighted output from each model as the output prediction.
The 2D-3D-CNN network is a spatiotemporal convolutional
network, depicted in Fig. 4, learning temporal information
from high level face feature maps from the same face feature
extractor CNN in CACA-RNN.

3D
CNN

3D
CNN

2D
CNN

2D
CNN

2D
CNN

2D
CNN

t=1

t=2

t=3

t=4

shared
parameters

Fig. 4: A 2D-3D-CNN model for emotion recognition. The
video stream is preprocessed into face stream of cropped faces.
Each face of face stream is first encoded by a pre-trained CNN
face feature extractor to high level feature maps. Then a 3D
convolution neural network learns spatiaotemporal kernel from
the feature map stream. There is an adaptive pooling before
classifier to handle various length of input.
Method
CACA-RNN
CACA-RNN+
2D-3D-CNN
baseline [6]

Validation Set
mAP (%)
ACC (%)
41.53
51.34
52.16
34.1

Testing Set
mAP (%)
ACC (%)
45.51
47.30

56.58
36.5

44.74
21.7

52.99
35.3

TABLE II: Submitted Results to MEC2017.

VII. C ONCLUSION
In this work, context information is first shown to be helpful
in emotion perception. Then, different architectures using facial and/or context information for video emotion recognition
was implemented and evaluation results were compared. It
shows that the models using both information can achieve the
highest accuracy.
Among them, a novel architecture, CACA-RNN, was proposed with a cascaded LSTM attention-based architecture
to leverage both face and context information from video.
CACA-RNN has the best performance in the compared models. CACA-RNN consists of two LSTMs, context RNN and
face RNN, processing context and face features respectively,
and attention mechanism in the face RNN enables it to learn
relationship to the context RNN and fuse information from
two sequences. Compared to a multi-branch RNN (ParallelRNN) and a single RNN handling concatenated features
(Concatenated-RNN), CACA-RNN outperforms on evaluation
MEC2017 validation dataset. The experiments also shows that
context information improves for video emotion recognition.
The models with additional context features perform better
than the models using only face features.
CACA-RNN may be further extended to fusing more kinds
of inputs for multi-modal emotion recognition or be extended
to other video-based tasks such as action recognition.

(a) CACA-RNN

(b) CACA-RNN+2D-3D-CNN

Fig. 5: Confusion matrices of MEC2017 testing set. (a)
The model has the highest mAP among five submissions in
MEC2017. (b) The model has the highest accuracy among five
submissions in MEC2017.

REFERENCES
[1] P. Ekman and W. V. Friesen, “Constants across cultures in the face and
emotion,” Journal of personality and social psychology, vol. 17, no. 2,
p. 124, 1971.
[2] J. A. Russell, “A circumplex model of affect,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 39, 1980, pp1161-1178.
[3] P. Ekman and W. V. Friesen, “Facial action coding system,” 1977.
[4] S. Zafeiriou, M. Nicolao, I. Kotsia, F. Benitez-Quiroz, and G. Zhao,
“Aff-wild: Valence and arousal in-the-wild challenge,” In IEEE CVPR
Workshop, 2017.
[5] A. Dhall, R. Goecke, S. Ghosh, J. Joshi, J. Hoey and T. Gedeon, “From
individual to group-level emotion recognition: EmotiW 5.0,” ACM ICMI
2017.
[6] Y. Li, J. Tao, B. Schuller, S. Shan, D. Jiang, and J. Jia, MEC 2017: the
multimodal emotion recognition challenge, In the first Asian Conference
on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction (ACII Asia 2018),
May, 2018.

[7] U. Hess and S. Hareli, “The influence of context on emotion recognition
in humans,” 2015 11th IEEE International Conference and Workshops
on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG), 2015, pp. 1-6.
[8] L. F. Barrett, B. Mesquita and M. Gendron, “Context in emotion perception,” Current Directions in Psychological Science, 2011, pp.286290.
[9] R. Kosti, J. M. Alvarez, A. Recasens, and A. Lapedriza, “Emotion
recognition in context,” In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
[10] M. Liu, R. Wang, S. Li, S. Shan, Z. Huang and X. Chen, “Combining
multiple kernel methods on Riemannian Manifold for emotion recognition in the wild,” ACM ICMI, 2014.
[11] A. Yao, D. Cai, P. Hu, S. Wang, L. Sha, and Y. Chen, “HoloNet: Towards
robust emotion recognition in the wild,” Proceedings of the 18th ACM
International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, 2016, pp472478.
[12] S. Pini, Stefano, O. Ben-Ahmed, M. Cornia, L. Baraldi, R. Cucchiara and
B. Huet, “Modeling multimodal cues in a deep learning-based framework for emotion recognition in the wild,” 10.1145/3136755.3143006,
2017.
[13] Y. Fan, X. Lu, D. Li, and Y. Liu, “Video-based emotion recognition
using CNN-RNN and C3D hybrid networks,” in Proceedings of the 18th
ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction. ACM, 2016,
pp. 445450.
[14] P. Hu, D. Cai, S. Wang, A. Yao, and Y. Chen, “Learning supervised
scoring ensemble for emotion recognition in the wild,” Proceedings
of the 19th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction
(ICMI), 2017, pp553-560.
[15] A. Karpathy, G. Toderici, S. Shetty, T. Leung, R. Sukthankar, and F. F.
Li, “Large-scale video classication with convolutional neural networks,”
In Proc. CVPR, 2014.
[16] D. Tran, L. Bourdev, R. Fergus, L. Torresani, and M. Paluri,
“Learning spatiotemporal features with 3D convolutional networks,”
arXiv:1412.0767, 2014.
[17] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning internal
representations by error propagation,” DTIC Document, Tech. Rep.,
1985.
[18] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” in Neural
Computation, MIT Press, 1997.
[19] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. Le, “Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks,” In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS), 2014.
[20] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate,” In ICLR, 2015.
[21] C. F. Benitez-Quiroz, R. Srinivasan, and A. M. Martinez, “Emotionet:
An accurate, real-time algorithm for the automatic annotation of a
million facial expressions in the wild,” In The IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
[22] M. T. Luong, H. Pham, and C. D. Manning, “Effective approaches to
attention-based neural machine translation,” In EMNLP, 2015.
[23] J. Donahue, L. A. Hendricks, S. Guadarrama, M. Rohrbach, S. Venugopalan, K. Saenko, and T. Darrell, “Long-term recurrent convolutional networks for visual recognition and description,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1411.4389, 2014.
[24] J. Ng, M. Hausknecht, S. Vijayanarasimhan, O. Vinyals, R. Monga,
and G. Toderici, “Beyond short snippets: Deep networks for video
classification,” In CVPR, 2015.
[25] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, “Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks,” In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS), 2014.
[26] L. Yao, A. Torabi, K. Cho, N. Ballas, C. Pal, H. Larochelle, and
A. Courville, “Describing videos by exploiting temporal structure,”
arXiv:1502.08029v4, 2015.
[27] F. N. Iandola, S. Han, M. W. Moskewicz, K. Ashraf, W. J. Dally, and K.
Keutzer, “Squeezenet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters
and 0.5 mb model size,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360, 2016.
[28] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z.
Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and
F. F. Li, “Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. International
Journal of Computer Vision,” 115(3):211252, 2015.
[29] Kingma, Diederik P. and Ba, Jimmy, “Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization,” arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

